Spain is a land of castles.
From the mountains of central Spain
to the Mediterranean coast,
castles dominate the landscape.
But there is one castle
—the Castle of Santa Catalina—
that played a unique part in the history
of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Spain.
This castle that guards the entrance
to the harbor of Cádiz,
in southern Spain,
became a military prison
over two centuries ago.
And this fortress
tested the faith
of around 300 Spanish Witnesses.
The battle began
in the 1960’s when Spain was ruled
by General Franco, a military dictator.
Franco wanted all Spanish men
to serve the fatherland,
and this meant military service.
But in Spain, there were Jehovah’s Witnesses
whose conscience said no.
So this castle became a battleground
where Franco’s military regime fought
to stamp out the Christian consciences
of those young Witnesses.
But times have changed in Spain.
The city of Cádiz has organized an exhibition
to salute the sacrifice made
by those valiant Witnesses.
Over 40 years after their release,
some of those conscientious objectors
have returned to Cádiz
to attend this exhibition.
At the inauguration,
the mayor described them
as citizens who spoke up
and who presented arguments
against the injustice
—arguments based on peace, freedom,
and, above all, their conscience.
Those who spent years
of their lives behind bars
have vivid memories
of the times
when this castle was their prison.
I think one of the greatest challenges
was never knowing
if we would be granted our freedom.
Our first sentence
was for three years.
And since we still refused
to enlist in the military,
we were then sentenced again
for another lengthy period.
So it seemed as if we had a life sentence.
We organized daily activities
to keep us busy.
Mornings, we worked at our trades
to earn a little money.
Afternoons, we set aside
for spiritual activities.
Our preaching
was done mainly by writing letters.
And in this way,
some of us could even pioneer.
A few people did reply to our letters,
and we were thrilled to hear
that some of them accepted the truth.
Of course,
we also preached to other prisoners,
and a few of them
became baptized Witnesses.
We also studied the Bible thoroughly,
both individually and as a group,
which proved vital
in building us up spiritually.
At first,
we had to study our literature secretly,
but later the guards
allowed us to have
the Bible and other publications.
As our numbers grew,
all the Witnesses
were kept together
in the same place
—in the same barracks—
so we could organize meetings.
We even held assemblies,
including the Biblical dramas.
And we loved
singing Kingdom songs.
These songs really
lifted up our spirits.
We really felt Jehovah’s loving care
when the brothers came to visit us.
We even had a special visit
from Brother Grant Suiter
of the Governing Body,
but there were also other visits
that we really looked forward to.
Many of the brothers endured
years of separation from their families
and fiancées.
This was a real test.
But these faithful sisters
wholeheartedly supported their neutral stand.
Those were years that molded me spiritually.
I studied the Bible
as I had never done before.
I developed skills
as a public speaker and as an overseer.
Above all, it was a time in my life
when I learned to rely totally on Jehovah.
Thanks to my fervent prayers,
he became my closest friend
and he never let me down.
That was priceless.
The firm stand of those Witnesses
gave a powerful testimony
in Cádiz and throughout Spain.
The run-down military prison
that once tested their faith
has been restored.
It is now a tourist attraction
and a cultural center.
But while the castle has changed,
the faith of those valiant Witnesses has not.
The castle certainly tested them,
but they fought a fine fight for the faith.
And with Jehovah’s help, they won the battle.
Forty years later,
their victory is still giving a witness
to Jehovah’s name.